As in a few other types of eusocial bees, a colony generally contains one queen bee, a female; seasonally up to a few thousand drone bees, or males;[36] and tens of thousands of female worker bees. 

Eggs are laid singly in a cell in a wax honeycomb, produced and shaped by the worker bees. 
Using her spermatheca, the queen can choose to fertilize the egg she is laying, usually depending on which cell she is laying it into. 
Drones develop from unfertilised eggs and are haploid, while females (queens and worker bees) develop from fertilised eggs and are diploid. 

Larvae are initially fed with royal jelly produced by worker bees, later switching to honey and pollen. 
The exception is a larva fed solely on royal jelly, which will develop into a queen bee. 
The larva undergoes several moultings before spinning a cocoon within the cell, and pupating.

Young worker bees, sometimes called "nurse bees", clean the hive and feed the larvae. 
When their royal jelly-producing glands begin to atrophy, they begin building comb cells. 
They progress to other within-colony tasks as they become older, such as receiving nectar and pollen from foragers and guarding the hive. 
Later still, a worker takes her first orientation flight and finally leaves the hive and typically spends the remainder of her life as a forager.

Worker bees cooperate to find food and use a pattern of "dancing" (known as the bee dance or waggle dance) to communicate information regarding resources with each other; this dance varies from species to species, but all living species of Apis exhibit some form of the behavior. 
If the resources are very close to the hive, they may also exhibit a less specific dance commonly known as the "round dance".
Honey bees also perform tremble dances, which recruit receiver bees to collect nectar from returning foragers.

Virgin queens go on mating flights away from their home colony to a drone congregation area and mate with multiple drones before returning. 
The drones die in the act of mating. 
Queen honey bees do not mate with drones from their home colony.

Colonies are established not by solitary queens, as in most bees, but by groups known as "swarms", which consist of a mated queen and a large contingent of worker bees. 
This group moves en masse to a nest site that was scouted by worker bees beforehand and whose location is communicated with a special type of dance. 
Once the swarm arrives, they immediately construct a new wax comb and begin to raise a new worker brood. 
This type of nest founding is not seen in any other living bee genus, though several groups of vespid wasps also found new nests by swarming (sometimes including multiple queens). 
Also, stingless bees will start new nests with large numbers of worker bees, but the nest is constructed before a queen is escorted to the site, and this worker force is not a true "swarm".

In cold climates, honey bees stop flying when the temperature drops below about 10 °C (50 °F) and crowd into the central area of the hive to form a "winter cluster". 
The worker bees huddle around the queen bee at the center of the cluster, shivering to keep the center between 27 °C (81 °F) at the start of winter (during the broodless period) and 34 °C (93 °F) once the queen resumes laying. 
The worker bees rotate through the cluster from the outside to the inside so that no bee gets too cold. 
The outside edges of the cluster stay at about 8–9 °C (46–48 °F). 
The colder the weather is outside, the more compact the cluster becomes. 

During winter, they consume their stored honey to produce body heat. 
The amount of honey consumed during the winter is a function of winter length and severity but ranges in temperate climates from 15 to 50 kilograms (33 to 110 lb).[37] 
In addition, certain bees, including the western honey bee as well as Apis cerana, are known to engage in effective methods of nest thermoregulation during periods of varying temperature in both summer and winter. 
During the summer, however, this is achieved through fanning and water evaporation from water collected in various fields.[38][39]

Of all the honey bee species, only A. mellifera has been used extensively for commercial pollination of fruit and vegetable crops. 
The scale of these pollination services is commonly measured in the billions of dollars, credited with adding about 9% to the value of crops across the world. 
However, despite contributing substantially to crop pollination, there is debate about the potential spillover to natural landscapes and competition between managed honey bees and many of the ~20,000 species of wild pollinators.[40]
\
Species of Apis are generalist floral visitors, and pollinate many species of flowering plants, but because of their "generalized" nature, they often do so inefficiently. 
Without specialized adaptations for specific flowers, their ability to reach pollen and nectar is often limited. 
This combined with their behavioural flexibility may be why they are the most commonly documented pollen thieves.[41] 
Indeed, for plant species with more specialized pollinators, experiments show that increased honeybee visitation can reduce pollination, both where honey bees are non-native[42] and even where they are native.[43] 
They can provide some pollination to many plants, but some plants have a native pollinator that is more effective at pollinating that species.[44] 
When honey bees are present as an invasive species in an area, they compete for flowers with native pollinators, which can actually push out the native species.[45]
